---
title: Separating Crypto Negotiation and Communication
abbrev: crypto separation
docname: draft-kuehlewind-taps-crypto-sep-latest
date:
category: info

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Kuehlewind
    name: Mirja Kuehlewind
    org: ETH Zurich
    email: mirja.kuehlewind@tik.ee.ethz.ch
    street: Gloriastrasse 35
    city: 8092 Zurich
    country: Switzerland
 -
    ins: T. Pauly
    name: Tommy Pauly
    org: Apple Inc.
    street: 1 Infinite Loop
    city: Cupertino, California 95014
    country: United States of America
    email: tpauly@apple.com
 -
    ins: C. A. Wood
    name: Christopher A. Wood
    org: Apple Inc.
    street: 1 Infinite Loop
    city: Cupertino, California 95014
    country: United States of America
    email: cawood@apple.com

informative:
   RFC4303:
   RFC5246:
   RFC6347:
   RFC7296:
   RFC7301:
   I-D.ietf-quic-tls:
   I-D.moskowitz-sse:
   I-D.mglt-ipsecme-diet-esp:

--- abstract

Due to the latency involved in connection setup and security handshakes, there is an increasing
deployment of cryptographic session resumption mechanisms. While cryptographic context and
endpoint capabilities need to be be known before encrypted application data can be sent, there is
otherwise no technical constraint that the cryptographic handshake must be performed on the same
transport connection. This document recommends a logical separation between the mechanism(s) used to negotiate
capabilities and set up the initial encryption context as well as maintain this context (control protocol), 
the application of encryption and
authentication state to data (record protocol), and the associated transport connection(s).

--- middle

# Introduction

Secure transport protocols are generally composed of three pieces:

1. A transport protocol to handle the transfer of data.
2. A record protocol to frame, encrypt and/or authenticate data
3. A control protocol to perform cryptographic handshakes, negotiate shared secrets,
and maintain state during the lifetime of cryptographic session inclusing session resumption
and key refreshment. (In the context of TLS, the control protocol is called the handshake protocol.)

For ease of deployment and standardization, among other reasons, these constituents are often tightly
coupled. For example, in TLS {{RFC5246}}, the control protocol depends on the record protocol,
and vice versa. However, more recent transport protocols such as QUIC {{I-D.ietf-quic-tls}} keep
these pieces separate. QUIC uses TLS to negotiate secrets, and *exports* those secrets
to encrypt packets directly.

Separating these pieces is important, as new secure transport protocols increasingly rely on
session resumption mechanisms where cryptographic context can be resumed to transmit
application data with the first packet without delay for connection setup and negotiation.
In the case where there is no cryptographic context available when an application
expresses the need to transmit data to a certain endpoint, it must first run the control protocol
on a transport connection before being able to transmit application data. If the control protocol can
be separated from the other components, then it can use another transport connection to
establish secrets without blocking the application's main transport connection. This also opens up
the possibility to run the control protocol well in advance of the need to send application data,
to avoid unnecessary delays. For example, a client system could maintain a database of endpoints it
is likely to communicate with, and establish keying material with a control protocol at periodic
intervals to ensure fresh keys for new transport connections.

{{I-D.moskowitz-sse}} proposes a similar approach. However while {{I-D.moskowitz-sse}} proposes
a new protocol to negotiate and maintain long-term cryptographic sessions,
this document relies on the use of existing protocols and only discusses requirements for the evolution
of these protocols and exchange of information within one endpoint locally.

# Terminology

- Transport Protocol: A protocol that can transport messages between two endpoints. This may represent
the service offered to applications to allow them to send and receive data before encryption; and also
represent the protocol that can transmit control data and encrypted records.

- Control Protocol: A protocol that performs a cryptographic handshake and, in addition, can validate and
authenticate endpoints, encrypt and authenticate its negotiation, and ultimately generate keying material.

- Record Protocol: A protocol that can use keying material to transform messages. A record will generally
add a frame around application data, and authenticate and/or encrypt the data.

- Keying Material: A shared secret from which pre-shared keys can be derived and subsequently used to
encrypt and authenticate data, generated by a control protocol and used by a record protocol.

# Protocol Interfaces

In traditional models in which the protocols are not separated out into the three elements of control,
record, and transport protocols, there are two basic approaches to the interactions:

1. The transport protocol provides data to the security protocol and gets back an encrypted version of
the data to be sent (control and record protocols are combined).
2. The security protocol provides keying material to the transport protocol, and the transport protocol is
responsible for encrypting data (transport and record protocols are combined).

By teasing apart all three portions as separate protocols, there end up being six interface points:

~~~
Application Data
     |    ^
     |    |
+----V----+-----+      (1)       +---------------+
|               +---------------->               |
|   Transport   |                |     Control   |
|               <----------------+               |
+-+-----^-------+      (2)       +-----+-----^---+
  |     |                              |     |
  |     |(6)                        (3)|     |
  |     |                              |     |(4)
  |     |        +---------------+     |     |
  |     +--------+               <-----+     |
  |(5)           |    Record     |           |
  +-------------->               +-----------+
                 +---------------+
~~~
{: #fig-dependencies title="Secure Transport Protocol Components and Interactions"}

1. A transport protocol depends upon a control protocol to establish keying material to protect application data being sent through the transport.
The main interface it relies upon is starting the control channel, or handshake, or ensuring that the material is ready.
2. A control protocol depends upon a transport protocol in order to send and receive negotiation messages with the remote peer.
3. A control protocol sends its keying material and cryptographic context to the record protocol to use.
4. A record protocol may signal state expiration events to a control protocol.
5. A transport protocol uses a record protocol to send and receive application data.
6. A record protocol uses a transport protocol to send and receive encrypted data.

## Control-Transport Interface

Note that for the purposes of this interface description, it is assumed that the application is primarily interacting
with the transport protocol, and thus the control protocol interacts with the application primarily through the abstraction
of the transport protocol.

- Start negotiation: The interface MUST provide an indication to start the protocol handshake for key negotiation, and
have a way to be notified when the handshake is complete.

- Identity constraints: The interface MUST allow the application to constrain the identities that it will accept
a connection to, such as the hostname it expects to be provided in certificate SAN.

- Local identities: The interface MUST allow the local identity to be set via a raw private key or interface to one
to perform cryptographic operations such as signing and decryption.

- State changes: The interface SHOULD provide a way for the transport to be notified of important state changes during
the protocol execution and session lifetime, e.g., when the handshake begins, ends, or when a key update occurs.

- Validation: The interface MUST provide a way for the application to participate in the endpoint authentication and validation,
which can either be specified as parameters to define how the peer's authentication can be validated, or when the protocol
provides the authentication information for the application to inspect directly.

- Caching domain and lifetime: The application SHOULD be able to specify the instances of the protocol that can share
cached keys, as well as the lifetime of cached resources.

- The protocol SHOULD allow applications to negotiate application protocols and related information.

- The protocol SHOULD allow applications to specify negotiable cryptographic algorithm suites.

- The protocol SHOULD expose the peer's identity information.

## Control-Record Interface

- Key export: The interface MUST provide a way to export keying material from a control protocol to
a record protocol with well-defined cryptographic properties, e.g., "forward-secure."

- Key lifetime and rotation: The interface MUST provide a way for the control protocol to define key
lifetime bounds in terms of *time* or *bytes encrypted* and, additionally, provide a way to forcefully
update cryptographic session keys at will. The record protocol MUST be able to signal back to the control
protocol that a lifetime has been reached and that rotation is required. These values SHOULD be configurable
by the application.

## Transport-Record Interface

- Transform data: The interface MUST provide a way to send raw application data from the transport protocol
to a record protocol to transform it based on the keying material. This data is then sent out by the
transport protocol. The same applies for inbound data, in which inbound transport data is transformed
by the record protocol into raw application data.

- Reliability: The transport MUST specify if messages are transmitted reliable and in order.

- Maximum message size (optional): The transport may specify a maximum message size for the encrypted
data if e.g. a datagram transport is used

# Existing Mappings

In this section we document existing mappings between common transport security
protocols and the three components described in Section I.

- TLS/DTLS: TLS {{RFC5246}} and DTLS {{RFC6347}} is a combination of a control (handshake)
and record protocol, with a dependency on some underlying transport.

~~~
              Application (configure and I/O)
                |     ^
                |     |
      +---------V-----+--------+
      |        Connection      |
      +----+----^--------------+
+----------|----|------------------------------------+     
|          |    |       --TLS--                      |
|     +----V----+-----+         +---------------+    |
|     |               +--------->               |    |
|     |    Control    |         |     Record    |    |
|     |  (Handshake)  <---------+               |    |
|     +---------------+         +----+------^---+    |
|                                    |      |        |
+------------------------------------|------|--------+
                                     |      |
                                +----V------+----+
                                |    Transport   |
                                +----------------+
~~~

- QUIC + TLS: The emerging QUIC standard is decomposed into the three pieces outlined in Section I {{I-D.ietf-quic-tls}}.
TLS is used as the control protocol running on a dedicated QUIC stream, a
QUIC-specific record protocol encrypts and encapsulates stream frames, and
the main QUIC component handles the transport of these frames.

~~~
    Application (configure and I/O)
      |     ^
+-----|-----|------------------------------------+     
|     |     |      --QUIC--                      |
|     |     |                                    |
|  +--V-----+---+             +--------------+   |   
|  |    QUIC    |------------>|      TLS     |   |
|  | (transport)|             |   (control)  |   |   
|  |            <-------------+              |   |
|  ++---^--+--^-+             +--^-------+---+   |
|   |   |  |  |                  |       |       |
|   |   |  |  |                  |       |       |
|   |   |  |  |  +V---------+-+  |       |       |
|   |   |  |  +-->   Packet   +--+       |       |
|   |   |  |     | Protection |          |       |
|   |   |  +-----+  (record)  <----------+       |
|   |   |        +------------+                  |
|   |   |                                        |
+---|---|----------+-----------------------------+
    |   |           
+---V---+--------+
|    Transport   |
+----------------+
~~~

- IKEv2 + ESP: IKEv2 {{RFC7296}} is a control protocol commonly used to establish keys for
use in IPsec (often VPN) deployments. It is already a distinct protocol from its commonly paired
record protocol, which is ESP {{RFC4303}}. ESP encrypts and authenticates IP datagrams, and sends
them as datagrams over a transport mechanism such, e.g., IP or UDP.

~~~
        Application (configure)    Application (I/O)                  
          |    ^                     |    ^
     +----V----+-----+         +-----V----+----+    
     |               +--------->               |    
     |     IKEv2     |         |     Record    |    
     |               <---------+               |    
     +----+------^---+         +----+------^---+   
          |      |                    |      |       
     +----V------+------------------V------+----+
     |            (Unreliable) Transport        |
     +------------------------------------------+
~~~

# Benefits of Separation

## Reducing Connection Latency

One of the clearest benefits of separating the control protocol from the record protocol is that the
cryptographic handshake can be performed out-of-band from the application's data transfer. This should
essentially reduce the number of RTTs required before being able to send data by the full length of the
handshake (which is commonly 1 or 2 RTTs in the best cases for TLS 1.2 and IKEv2, potentially more if
cookie challenges or extended authentication are required).

To avoid long-lived transport connections that wouldn't be actively used, and thus would be vulnerable
to timeouts on NATs or firewalls, an obvious approach to separating the control and record protocols
is to use different transport connections for the early handshake and the data transfer. However, this
approach of using separate connections will not always save RTTs if the cryptographic handshake and data transfer are
back-to-back. Each connection may require its own transport protocol handshake, and if the data transfer
must wait for two transport protocols to establish and the cryptographic handshake to be finished before
sending, then it may experience higher latency. Implementations SHOULD avoid this by either allowing the
control and record protocols to share a single transport connection or open two connections in parallel
when the control protocol has not pre-fetched keys. Latency benefits, however, can even be achieved
when ensuring that this scenario does not occur by always having the control protocol refresh the keys
whenever old ones are near expiry.

## Protocol Flexibility

Separation of the control, record, and transport protocols also allows for more flexible composition of
protocols with one another. If a deployment uses a control protocol like TLS, which requires a stream-based
transport protocol like TCP, separation of protocols will allow it to use the resulting keys for record
protocols that run on datagram transport protocols like UDP.

This flexibility may be useful for implementations that are optimizing for packet size by choosing
minimal/lightweight record protocols, while being able to use commonly supported control protocols
like TLS. One example here is the approach of a VPN tunnel that uses ESP or Diet-ESP {{I-D.mglt-ipsecme-diet-esp}}
to encrypt datagrams, but uses TLS for establishing keys.

## Protocol Capability Negotiation

Enabling the use of a different transport protocol for the actual data transmission than for the
cryptographic handshakes opens also the possibility to negotiate protocol capabilities for the data
transmission. For TLS, usually TCP is the appropriate transport protocol to use, as it is also widely
supported by endpoints. Allowing an endpoint to indicate the support of other, new transport protocols
within the TCP connection that is used for the cryptographic handshake, provides a dynamic
transition path to enable easy deployment of new protocols.

<!-- CAW: a hint to TLPN could be dropped here -->

# IANA Considerations

This document has on request to IANA.

# Security Considerations

(editor's note: this section will be added later. However, this document discusses the use of
cryptographic context for transport connections and as such it has security relevant consideration
within the whole document.)

# Acknowledgments

This work is partially supported by the European Commission under Horizon 2020
grant agreement no. 688421 Measurement and Architecture for a Middleboxed
Internet (MAMI), and by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research, and
Innovation under contract no. 15.0268. This support does not imply endorsement.
Thanks to Brian Trammell for reviewing this draft.
