---
title: Separating Crypto Negotiation and Communication
abbrev: crypto separation
docname: draft-kuehlewind-crypto-sep-00
date:
category: info

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Kuehlewind
    name: Mirja Kuehlewind
    org: ETH Zurich
    email: mirja.kuehlewind@tik.ee.ethz.ch
    street: Gloriastrasse 35
    city: 8092 Zurich
    country: Switzerland
 -
    ins: T. Pauly
    name: Tommy Pauly
    org: Apple Inc.
    street: 1 Infinite Loop
    city: Cupertino, California 95014
    country: United States of America
    email: tpauly@apple.com
 -
    ins: C. A. Wood
    name: Christopher A. Wood
    org: Apple Inc.
    street: 1 Infinite Loop
    city: Cupertino, California 95014
    country: United States of America
    email: cawood@apple.com

informative:
   RFC5246:
   RFC7301:
   I-D.ietf-quic-tls:
   I-D.moskowitz-sse:


--- abstract

Due to the latency involved in connection setup and security handshakes, there is an increasing
deployment of cryptographic session resumption mechanisms. While cryptographic context and
endpoint capabilities need to be be known before encrypted application data can be sent, there is
otherwise no technical constraint that the crypto handshake must be performed on the same transport
connection. This document recommends a logical separation between the mechanism(s) used to negotiate
capabilities and set up encryption context (handshake protocol), the application of encryption and
authentication state to data (record protocol), and the associated transport connection(s).

--- middle

# Introduction

Secure transport protocols are generally composed of three pieces:

1. A transport protocol to control the transfer of data.
2. A record protocol to frame, encrypt and/or authenticate data
3. A handshake protocol to negotiate cryptographic secrets.

For ease of deployment and standardization, among other reasons, these constituents are often tightly
coupled. For example, in TLS {{RFC5246}}, the handshake protocol depends on the record protocol,
and vice versa. However, more recent transport protocols such as QUIC {{I-D.ietf-quic-tls}} keep
these pieces separate. QUIC uses TLS to negotiate secrets, and *exports* those secrets
to encrypt packets directly.

Separating these pieces is important, as new secure transport protocols increasingly rely on
session resumption mechanisms where cryptographic context can be resumed to transmit
application data with the first packet without delay for connection setup and negotiation.
In the case where there is no cryptographic context available when an application
expresses the need to transmit data to a certain endpoint, it must first run the handshake protocol
on a transport connection before being able to transmit application data. If the handshake protocol can
be separated from the other components, then it can use another transport connection to
establish secrets without blocking the application's main transport connection. This also opens up
the possibility to run the handshake protocol well in advance of the need to send application data,
to avoid unnecessary delays. For example, a client system could maintain a database of endpoints it
is likely to communicate with, and establish keying material with a handshake protocol at periodic
intervals to ensure fresh keys for new transport connections.

{{I-D.moskowitz-sse}} proposes a similar approach. However while {{I-D.moskowitz-sse}} proposes
a new protocol to negotiate and maintain long-term cryptographic sessions,
this document relies on the use of existing protocols and only discusses requirements for the evolution
of these protocols and exchange of information within one endpoint locally.

# Terminology

- Transport Protocol: A protocol that can transport messages between two endpoints. This may represent the service offered to applications to allow them to send and receive data before encryption; and also represent the protocol that can transmit handshake data and encrypted records.

- Handshake Protocol: A protocol that can validate and authenticate endpoints, encrypt and authenticate its negotiation, and ultimately generate keying material.

- Record Protocol: A protocol that can use keying material to transform messages. A record will generally add a frame around application data, and authenticate and/or encrypt the data.

- Keying Material: One or more pre-shared keys that can be used to encrypt and authenticate data, generated by a handshake protocol and used by a record protocol.

# Protocol Interfaces

In traditional models in which the protocols are not seperated out into the three elements of handshake,
record, and transport protocols, there are two basic approaches to the interactions:

1. The transport protocol provides data to the security protocol and gets back an encrypted version of
the data to be sent (handshake and record protocols are combined)
2. The security protocol provides keying material to the transport protocol, and the transport protocol is
responsible for encrypting data (transport and record protocols are combined)

By teasing apart all three portions as separate protocols, there end up being six interface points:

~~~
Application Data
     |
     |
+----V----------+      (1)       +---------------+
|               +---------------->               |
|   Transport   |                |   Handshake   |
|               <----------------+               |
+-+-----^-------+      (2)       +-----+-----^---+
  |     |                              |     |
  |     |(6)                        (3)|     |
  |     |                              |     |(4)
  |     |        +---------------+     |     |
  |     +--------+               <-----+     |
  |(5)           |    Record     |           |
  +-------------->               +-----------+
                 +---------------+
~~~

1. A transport protocol depends upon a handshake protocol to establish keying material to protect application data being sent through the transport. The main interface it relies upon is starting the handshake, or ensuring that the material is ready.
2. A handshake protocol depends upon a transport protocol in order to send and receive negotiation messages with the remote peer.
3. A handshake protocol sends its keying material and cryptographic context to the record protocol to use
4. A record protocol may signal state expiration events to a handshake protocol
5. A transport protocol uses a record protocol to send and receive application data
6. A record protocol uses a transport protocol to send and receive encrypted data

## Handshake-Transport Interface

Note that for the purposes of this interface description, it is assumed that the application is primarily interacting with the transport protocol, and thus the handshake protocol interacts with the application primarily through the abstraction of the transport protocol.

- Start negotiation: The interface MUST provide an interface to start the protocol handshake for key negotiation, and
have a way to be notified when the handshake is complete.

- Identity constraints: The interface MUST allow the application to constrain the identities that it will accept
a connection to, such as the hostname it expects to be provided in certificate SAN.

- Local identities: The interface MUST allow the local identity to be set via a raw private key or interface to one
to perform cryptographic operations such as signing and decryption.

- State changes: The interface SHOULD provide a way for the transport to be notified of important state changes during
the protocol execution and session lifetime, e.g., when the handshake begins, ends, or when a key update occurs.

- Validation: The interface MUST provide a way for the application to participate in the endpoint authentication and validation,
which can either be specified as parameters to define how the peer's authentication can be validated, or when the protocol
provides the authentication information for the application to inspect directly.

- Caching domain and lifetime: The application SHOULD be able to specify the instances of the protocol that can share
cached keys, as well as the lifetime of cached resources.

- The protocol SHOULD allow applications to negotiate application protocols and related information.

- The protocol SHOULD allow applications to specify negotiable cryptographic algorithm suites.

- The protocol SHOULD expose the peer's identity information.

## Handshake-Record Interface

- Key export: The interface MUST provide a way to export keying material from a handshake protocol to a record protocol with well-defined cryptographic properties, e.g., "forward-secure" or "perfectly forward secure"

- Key lifetime and rotation: The interface MUST provide a way for the handshake protocol to define key lifetime bounds in terms of *time* or *bytes encrypted* and, additionally, provide a way to forcefully update cryptographic session keys at will. The record protocol MUST be able to signal back to the handshake protocol that a lifetime has been reached and that rotation is required. These values SHOULD be configurable by the application.

## Transport-Record Interface

- Transform data: The interface MUST provide a way to send raw application data from the transport protocol to a record protocol to transform it based on the keying material. This data is then sent out by the transport protocol. The same applies for inbound data, in which inbound transport data is transformed by the record protocol into raw application data.

# Existing Mappings

In this section we document existing mappings between common transport security
protocols and the three components described in Section I.

## TLS/DTLS

XXX

## QUIC

XXX

## IKEv2 + ESP

XXX

# IANA Considerations

This document has on request to IANA.

# Security Considerations

[editor's note: this section will be added later. However, this document discusses the use of
cryptograohic context for transport connections and as such it has security relevant consideration
within the whole document.]

# Acknowledgments

This work is partially supported by the European Commission under Horizon 2020
grant agreement no. 688421 Measurement and Architecture for a Middleboxed
Internet (MAMI), and by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research, and
Innovation under contract no. 15.0268. This support does not imply endorsement.
